CLINICAL LEGAL EDUCATION
INTRODUCTION TO LEGAL PRACTICE 
The legal profession in Nigeria owes its origins to the British and the introduction of their judicial system. Prior to colonisation, traditional systems did not feature lawyers specially appointed for that purpose in Nigeria. The first legislative step to regulate the legal profession was taken in 1876, with the enactment of the Supreme Court Ordinance.
By virtue of section 76, of the Ordinance, every barrister was entitled to practice as a solicitor, while every solicitor could practice as a barrister. The period marked the beginning of a fused legal profession in Nigeria, and a departure from the English system where barristers are different from solicitors. A legal practitioner in Nigeria is enrolled as a barrister and solicitor of the Supreme Court of Nigeria, allowing them to both prepare legal documents (solicitor) and advocate in court (barrister).
As the Nigerian legal system developed, there was a need to have better qualified legal practitioners and a better organizational system. A committee was set up to consider and make recommendations for the future of the legal profession in Nigeria with particular regard to legal education and admission to practice, right of audience before the courts, inter alia. The committee submitted its report in October of 1959 with recommendations on a wide range of issues touching on the improvement of the legal education and practice in Nigeria. These recommendations led to the enactment of the Legal Education Act of 1962, which dealt with the training of persons as legal practitioners and the Legal Practitioners Act of 1962. 
The profession is primarily regulated by the Legal Practitioners Act (LPA) 1962 (currently undergoing potential repeal and re-enactment) and the Rules of Professional Conduct for Legal Practitioners 2007.
Structure of the Legal Profession

Key Bodies- The Body of Benchers is responsible for the call to Bar, while the Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Committee (LPDC) handles misconduct.
Legal Practice includes both private and public practice. Law firms, ranging from sole practitioners to large partnerships handling corporate, litigation, or commercial matters, are involved in private practice. While legal practitioners who work in the Ministry of Justice, or government agencies are involved in public practice or service.
Council of Legal Education
The responsibility of education of persons aspiring to be legal practitioners in Nigeria rests primarily in the Council of Legal Education, first established under section 1 of the Legal Education Act, 1962, and now under the Legal Education (Consolidation, etc.) Act.
The Council's primary responsibility for training future legal practitioners is done through the Nigerian Law School. The Council is vested with the statutory duty of issuing a qualifying certificate to any Nigerian or Non-Nigerian that successfully completes an academic year of practical training in the Nigerian Law School.
The Nigerian Law School
The Nigerian Law School provides the required practical orientation for candidates who aspire to be called to the Nigerian bar. The admission requirement is usually a law degree of an approved university or a pass in the English, Irish or Scottish bar examinations or a pass in the Solicitors final examination of Great Britain and Ireland. An applicant must also satisfy the Council of Legal Education that he is of good character.
Upon admission, students who obtained their qualifying degrees outside Nigeria are required to take and pass Nigerian Legal System, Nigerian Land Law, Nigerian Criminal Law and Nigerian Constitutional Law. The purpose of taking these courses is to acquaint the foreign-trained students with the general principles underlining Nigerian Law.
The Nigerian Law School focuses on procedural law. In addition to lectures and tutorials, students are also to go through moot court exercises and a period of attachment to law offices and courts to understand the practical aspect.
Call to the Nigerian Bar
The practice of formally calling persons aspiring to be legal practitioners to bar did not start in the Nigerian Legal System until 1971 when the Legal Practitioners (Amendment) Act was promulgated. The tradition was subsequently maintained in the Legal Practitioners Act as a precondition for enrollment as a legal practitioner.
According to section 4 of the Legal Practitioners Act, a person is entitled to be called to the bar if:
a. he is a citizen of Nigeria.
b. he produces to the Benchers a qualifying certificate issued by the Council of Legal Education.
c. he satisfies the Benchers that he is of good character.
The Council of Legal Education may by regulation provide that the provisions of paragraph (b) above shall not apply to any citizen of Nigeria in such cases and on such conditions as may be specified by the regulations.
Entitlement to Practice
Every person, whether a lawyer or an ordinary member of the public, has a right to represent himself in arguing his own case either at first instance or upon appeal. However, only a legal practitioner may represent another. If anyone, not being a legal practitioner, presents himself as one, such a person would be deemed to have committed an offence. Where a legal practitioner is also involved in a case, he may represent himself, but may not represent others even when they are on the same side of the case. 
There are three recognized ways of becoming a legal practitioner, which are by enrollment, by warrant and by being a law officer.
Entitlement by enrollment
This is the most common way of becoming a legal practitioner. There is a roll of legal practitioners which is maintained by the Chief Registrar of the Supreme Court. A person who has been called to the Bar is entitled to have his name kept in the roll. The enrollment is not limited to Nigerians, as Non-Nigerians may be enrolled if they satisfy the following.
a. that such a person is a citizen of a member OAU (now AU) country which affords to Nigerians equivalent rights of enrollment and audience before its courts as are available to citizens of Nigeria in his country.
b. such a person is entitled to practice in his own country.
c. such a person has passed, in Nigeria, an examination by the Council of Legal Education in general knowledge of Nigerian Law and satisfies the Attorney-General as to such knowledge.
The Attorney-General May cancel any such enrollment either if the practicing facilities for Nigerians in the applicant's country have been withdrawn or if the applicant has become unfit to have his name on the roll.
Entitlement by Warrant
A person whose name is not on the roll but is entitled as an advocate in a country with a system similar to that of Nigeria may apply to the Chief Justice if Nigeria for permission to practice as a barrister in Nigeria. The application, which may either be made directly or on his behalf, would only be in respect of the proceedings described in the application. Such a warrant will entitle the person concerned to practice as a barrister only for the purpose of the said proceedings and any appeal in connection with it. This form of entitlement is limited, as such a person must be qualified as an advocate or barrister in their home country, and not just as a solicitor. Also, it only grants entitlement to act as a legal practitioner in one case.
Entitlement by Virtue of Being a Legal Officer
Any person exercising the functions of the Federal or State Attorney-General, Solicitor-General or Director of Public Prosecutions, or such offices in the Federal or State public service as the respective Attorneys-General may by order specify, is entitled to practice as barrister and solicitor for the purposes of that office. Similarly, the Attorney General, the Solicitor General of the Federation, the Director of Public Prosecutions of the Federation, Legal Draftsman of the Federation, or State Counsel ex officio solicitors and advocates of the Supreme Court of Nigeria. Any person appointed to any of these offices is deemed entitled to appear as counsel in all courts in Nigeria in which counsel may appear so long as he continues to hold such office. This provision is usually put to use where there is a shortage of manpower in government ministries, to allow persons who are ordinarily not fully qualified to be employed as counsel and law officers in the service of government.
Restrictions on Practice
As a general rule, every legal practitioner whose name is on the roll is entitled to practice the profession and be accorded a right of audience in any court in Nigeria subject to certain limitations. The following are some of the restrictions to a legal practitioner's right to practice.
1. Non-payment of Practice Fee
According to section 8(2) of the Legal Practitioners Act, no Legal Practitioners save for law officers shall be accorded the right of audience in any court in Nigeria in any year unless he has paid to the Chief Registrar of the Supreme Court in respect of that year such practicing fee as may be prescribed from time to time.
2. Public Officers
All legal practitioners who are public officers are prohibited from engaging in private legal practice. A breach of this prohibition shall be a criminal offence, and may lead to the legal practitioner's name being struck off the roll. Law lecturers are exempted from this rule.
3. Retired Judges
Most judges begun as qualified legal practitioners. However, section 292(2) of the constitution provides that any person who has held office as a judicial officer shall not act as a legal practitioner before any court even after ceasing to hold office. However, such a person may still hold himself out as a legal practitioner or act as a solicitor.
4. Senior Advocates of Nigeria
A holder of the rank may not appear in any civil case before any superior court of record except with a junior or another Senior Advocate of Nigeria. Also, he shall not engage or agree to engage in drafting any instrument where the appropriate or prescribed fees are less than 400 naira, although he may do so free of charge or craft any instrument connected with parliamentary process for a lesser charge.
5. Salaried Employees
The rules of professional conduct generally prohibit a legal practitioner from appearing as an advocate in any court or tribunal while being a servant or in salaried employment. This is subject to the qualification that the following circumstances shall not be construed to mean that the legal practitioner is a servant or is in salaried employment.
a. Receipt of fees as a director of a limited liability company, provided that such a recipient shall not appear as an advocate for his company.
b. Employment as a legal officer in any government department or a statutory corporation or a university.
c. Employment as a lecturer in law.
Professional Etiquette
A legal practitioner is at liberty to use his discretion in the conduction of a case as he deems fit. It is in view of attempting to protect the client from the abuse of this discretion, amongst other things, that there are some duties which are expected of the legal practitioner. They are as follows.
a. duty to the court
b. duty in the prosecution of cases
c. duty to his clients
d. duty to professional colleagues
e. duty to the general public
f. duty of professional dignity.
a. Duty to the court
The most important duty of the legal practitioner is the duty to respect the court for the Supreme importance of the institution. Counsels should also endeavour to be punctual in court, and are to give prompt notice to the court and fellow counsels involved in a case in the event of lateness or absence. The counsel should also not relate with a judge in a manner calculated to gain special consideration or favour from the judge. Counsels should also avoid verbal exchanges with opposing counsels.
The counsel is also to approach the court with honesty, and is not to misrepresent facts or build his case upon falsehood. Counsels are also to be dressed in a proper and dignified manner when appearing before a court. When appearing before an inferior court or a tribunal, a dark suit over a white shirt, for men, and a dark skirt suit and a white blouse, for women, shall be satisfactory. The wig, gown, wing collar and bib are additional requirements when appearing in superior courts. As a mark of respect, the counsels should also rise when addressing or being addressed by the judge.
b. Duty in the conduct of cases
One area where the legal practitioner often finds himself in conflict with the general public is in how he is expected to treat accused persons. While a normal person would ordinarily be against an accused person, a legal practitioner is sometimes expected to defend such a person to the best of his abilities. A legal practitioner is expected to put his personal beliefs aside. Even where the accused person makes a confidential admission of guilt to the counsel, the counsel is still to represent such a person. However, the counsel is not to present facts which are inconsistent with the disclosure. Where the legal practitioner is prosecuting on behalf of the state, he should strive towards justice. He is to prosecute, not persecute, and he is to be an advocate of justice. He is not to strive towards a conviction at all cost, but he is to strive towards justice. He is not to suppress facts capable of establishing the accused's innocence.
c. Duty to clients
A legal practitioner stands in a fiduciary relationship to his client, and so should not exploit his client's weakness or ignorance of his rights under the law. A legal practitioner owes his client honesty and must not be personally interested as a party in the subject matter of the suit he is handling as counsel. Where he is interested, he is bound to disclose the nature of his interest to his client. It is unprofessional to represent opposing parties with different interests unless permission is gotten from both. Property collected in trust for his client should not be mixed with a counsel's own property, and such property should not be used for his personal use. Any compensation gotten without the knowledge of the client in the course of carrying out his services must be revealed to the client.
A counsel is to employ the best of his skill and abilities in trying to obtain justice for his client. However, a counsel is not to do anything which is immoral or unethical for his client. A counsel is not to refuse to represent a client after accepting to do so unless another member of the bar is available to take up the task, or the client is given sufficient notice to choose another counsel.
d. Duty to professional colleagues
While a client had absolute discretion to approach more than one legal practitioner, a subsequently appointed legal practitioner should decline an association which is objectionable to the original counsel. Another counsel may come into the case when the first is relieved. Brief snatching amongst colleagues is to be discouraged and any counsel handing over a brief must do so in good time to enable the receiving counsel to get acquainted with the facts. Counsels, as friends at the bar, should not allow the ill-feeling between their respective clients to influence their conduct towards each other. They should at all times deal with each other in utmost good faith, keeping to their words and all implied agreements.
e. Duty to the general public
Due to the dignity of the profession, a legal practitioner is not to advertise his services, although a simple notice at or outside his chambers, note papers and visiting cards or genuine notification of address are not reprehensible. What the rule abhors is cheap publicity and touting.
 Duty to ensure professional dignity
A legal practitioner is to always act with honor and dignity of the profession, to expose all corrupt or dishonest conduct and aid in guarding the bar against the admission of candidates who are unsuitable by reason of their moral character or insufficient qualification. A legal practitioner is not to be a party to fraud to the detriment of the court or a party. A legal practitioner is not allowed to combine private practice with any other unauthorized profession, or with personal trading or as a commission agent or ship chancellor or such other incompatible trade as may be declared by the Bar Council. Evolving trends
Modernization- New legislation is being proposed to modernize regulations, strengthen professional standards and enhance public confidence in legal practice.
Specialization- There is an increasing focus on specialized fields like technology, energy, and intellectual property.
Digitalization- Efforts to create a National Law Directory for improved visibility and networking. 
Mandatory NBA Seal/Stamp- All court processes, legal documents, and opinions must bear the official seal of a registered practitioner. 

Plea Bargaining
A plea bargain, also known as a plea deal, is a legal arrangement in criminal law, where the defendant agrees to plead guilty to a charge in exchange for concessions from the prosecutor. These concessions can include a reduction in the severity of the charges, the dismissal of some charges, or a more lenient sentencing recommendation. Plea bargaining serves as a mechanism to expedite the resolution of criminal cases, allowing both the prosecution and the defense to avoid the time, expense, and uncertainty of a trial. It is a prevalent practice in the United States, where it resolves the vast majority of criminal cases, and has been adopted in various forms in other legal systems worldwide.
Plea bargains can take different forms, such as 
1 charge bargaining, where a defendant pleads guilty to a lesser offense, or 
2 sentence bargaining, where the expected sentence is agreed upon before a guilty plea.
Prosecutors often offer favorable plea bargains to defendants who agree to testify for the state in cases against other defendants.
In some jurisdictions where plea bargaining is allowed, the judiciary retains the final authority to approve or reject plea agreements, ensuring that any proposed sentence aligns with public interest and justice standards. 
The use of plea bargains remains controversial. Opponents argue that it may encourage defendants, including the innocent, to plead guilty out of fear of harsher penalties if convicted at trial. Proponents, however, emphasize its role in conserving judicial resources and providing a degree of certainty for all parties involved.
Advantages 
Plea bargaining has been defended as a voluntary exchange that leaves both parties better off, in that defendants have many procedural and substantive rights, including a right to trial and to appeal a guilty verdict. By pleading guilty, defendants waive those rights in exchange for a commitment from the prosecutor, such as a reduced charge or more favorable sentence. For a defendant who believes that conviction is almost certain, a discount to the sentence is more useful than an unlikely chance of acquittal. The prosecutor secures a conviction while avoiding the need to commit time and resources to trial preparation and a possible trial.  Plea bargaining similarly helps preserve money and resources for the court in which the prosecution occurs. It also means that victims and witnesses do not have to testify at the trial, which in some cases may be traumatic.   
Disadvantages 
A prosecutor may want to maintain a high conviction rate or avoid losing high-profile trials, creating the potential that they will enter into a plea bargain that furthers their interests but reduces the potential of the prosecution and sentence to deter crime. Prosecutors may also make charging decisions that significantly affect a defendant's sentence, and may file charges or offer plea deals that cause even an innocent defendant to consider or accept a plea bargain.
In England and Wales, plea bargaining, in the sense of seeking a particular sentence in exchange for dropping some charges, is not permitted; only the judge or magistrates have the power to determine sentence, and an agreement between the prosecution and defence cannot bind the court. A defendant is permitted to plead guilty to some charges listed on the charge sheet or indictment and deny others, and the prosecution may agree to accept this plea and drop the denied charges; such an agreement will generally be accepted by the court as it serves the public interest, as well as the defendant's and victims' interests, to avoid the expense and stress of a trial. The defendant may also plead guilty on the basis of accepted facts that may affect sentencing while denying others. 

Plea Bargaining under Nigerian Legal System 
Plea Bargaining was first introduced into Nigerian law by section 14(2) of the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) Act which stated that 
"the Commission may compound any offence punishable under the Act by accepting such sums of money as it thinks fit not exceeding the maximum amount to which that person would have been liable if he had been convicted of that offence".  
Fact Bargaining, a less common form of plea bargaining, which focuses more on the admission of certain facts, is more frequently applied in financial crimes handled by the EFCC, with notable cases involving Tafa Balogun, DSP Alamieyeseigha, and Cecelia Ibru.
As we speak, news has it that ex-aviation minister, Stella Oduah, who was arraigned on December 10, 2025 in connection with the alleged misappropriation of 2.5billion naira, perpetrated during her time in office, has applied to the Attorney General of the Federation to enter plea bargain talks concerning the case.
With the advent of the Administration of Criminal Justice Act (ACJA) 2015, plea bargaining in Nigeria was formally integrated into the criminal Justice System According to section 494(1) of ACJA, a "Plea bargain" means the process in criminal proceedings whereby the defendant and the prosecution work out a mutually acceptable disposition of the case; including the plea of the defendant to a lesser offence than that charged in the complaint or information and in conformity with other conditions imposed by the prosecution, in return for a lighter sentence than that for the higher charge subject to the Court's approval." 
Section 270 of ACJA 2015 codified the process, providing that a prosecutor may receive, consider, and enter into a plea bargain with a defendant, with the consent of the victim or his representative during or after the presentation of the evidence of the prosecution, but before the presentation of the evidence of the defense, provided that the following conditions are present: 
(a) the evidence of the prosecution is insufficient to prove the offence charged beyond reasonable doubt; 
(b) where the defendant has agreed to return the proceeds of the crime or make restitution to the victim or his representative; or 
(c) where the defendant, in a case of conspiracy, has fully cooperated with the investigation and prosecution of the crime by providing relevant information for the successful prosecution of other offenders. 
Section 270(6) provides that any agreement between the parties shall be reduced to writing and shall: 
(a) state that, before conclusion of the agreement, the defendant has been informed: 
(i) that he has a right to remain silent, (ii) of the consequences of not remaining silent, and (iii) that he is not obliged to make any confession or admission that could be used in evidence against him; 
(b) state fully, the terms of the agreement and any admission made; 
(c) be signed by the prosecutor, the defendant, the legal practitioner and the interpreter, as the case may be; and 
(d) a copy of the agreement forwarded to the Attorney General of the Federation.
A plea bargain is not effective until approved by the court, which must ensure the agreement is voluntary and fair. 
The presiding judge or magistrate shall ascertain whether the defendant admits the allegation in the charge to which he has pleaded guilty and whether he entered into the agreement voluntarily and without undue influence and may where: 
(a) he is satisfied that the defendant is guilty of the offence to which he has pleaded guilty, convict the defendant on his plea of guilty to that offence, and shall award the compensation to the victim in accordance with the term of the agreement which shall be delivered by the court...; or 
(b) he is for any reason of the opinion that the defendant cannot be convicted of the offence in respect of which the agreement was reached and to which the defendant has pleaded guilty or that the agreement is in conflict with the defendant's right referred to in subsection (6), he shall record a plea of not guilty in respect of such charge and order that the trial proceed. ) 
 Where a defendant has been convicted, the presiding judge or magistrate shall consider the sentence as agreed upon by the parties and where he is: 
(a) satisfied that such sentence is an appropriate sentence, impose the sentence; 
(b) of the view that he would have imposed a lesser sentence than the sentence agreed, impose the lesser sentence; or 
(c) of the view that the offence requires a heavier sentence than the sentence agreed upon, he shall inform the defendant of such heavier sentence he considers to be appropriate. 
Where the defendant has been informed of the heavier sentence as contemplated, the defendant may: abide by his plea of guilty as agreed upon and agree that the presiding judge or magistrate proceed with the sentencing; or (b) withdraw from his plea agreement, in which event the trial shall proceed de novo (afresh) before another presiding judge or magistrate, as the case may be. 

Conditions for plea bargaining often involves returning proceeds of crime, making restitution, or providing full cooperation in the investigation of other offenders.
Plea bargaining is somewhat beneficial because it serves as a tool to accelerate justice, reduce congestion in correctional centers, and recover stolen public funds. Regardless, concerns exist that it allows wealthy, corrupt individuals to escape severe punishment by returning only a small portion of stolen funds.


 






 



